---
layout: chapter
title: "Design Notes"
---
# Design Notes

This design follows the backward design process described in
==chapter==s:process==.

## Brainstorming

*These questions and answers provide a rough scope for the material.*

1.  What problems will learners learn how to solve?
    
    1.  How people learn and what that tells us about how best to teach
        them (educational psychology, cognitive load, study skills).
    
    2.  How to design and deliver instruction in computing skills
        (backward curriculum design, some pedagogical content knowledge
        for computing).
    
    3.  How to deliver lessons (teaching as a performance art, live
        coding, motivation and demotivation, and automation).
    
    4.  How to grow a teaching community (community organization and
        marketing).

2.  What is out of scope?
    
    1.  How to teach children or people with special learning needs.
        Much of what’s in this material applies to those learners, but
        they have different or extra needs.
    
    2.  How to rigorously assess the impact of training. Informal
        self-assessment will be included, but we will not try to explain
        how to do publishable scientific research in education.
    
    3.  How to design and deliver entire degree programs and other
        extended curriculum. Again, much of what’s in this material
        applies, but the extra needs of large-scale curriculum design is
        out of scope.

3.  What concepts and techniques will learners encounter?
    
    1.  \(7{\pm}2\) and chunking.
    
    2.  Authentic tasks with tangible artifacts.
    
    3.  Bloom’s Taxonomy, Fink’s Taxonomy, and Piaget’s development
        stage theory.
    
    4.  Branding.
    
    5.  Cognitive development from novice to competent to expert.
    
    6.  Cognitive load.
    
    7.  Collaborative lesson development.
    
    8.  Concept mapping.
    
    9.  Designing assessments with diagnostic power.
    
    10. Dunning-Kruger effect.
    
    11. Expert blind spot.
    
    12. Externalized cognition.
    
    13. Fixed vs. growth mindset (and critiques of it).
    
    14. Formative vs. summative assessment.
    
    15. Governance models of community organizations.
    
    16. Inquiry-based learning (and critiques of it).
    
    17. Intrinsic vs. extrinsic motivation.
    
    18. *Jugyokenkyu* (lesson study).
    
    19. Learner personas.
    
    20. Legitimate peripheral participation in a community of practice.
    
    21. Live coding (teaching as a performance art).
    
    22. Pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) and technological
        pedagogical and content knowledge (TPACK).
    
    23. Peer instruction.
    
    24. Reflective (deliberate) practice.
    
    25. Backward design.
    
    26. Stereotype threat (and critiques of it).
    
    27. Working memory vs. persistent memory.

4.  What mistakes or misconceptions will they have?
    
    1.  Children and adults learn the same way.
    
    2.  Computing education should be for and about computer science.
    
    3.  Programming skill is innate.
    
    4.  Student evaluations of courses are indicative of learning
        outcomes.
    
    5.  Teaching ability is innate.
    
    6.  The best way to teach is to throw people in at the deep end.
    
    7.  The best way to teach is to use “real” tools right from the
        start.
    
    8.  Visual-auditory-kinesthetic (VAK) learning styles are real.
    
    9.  Women just don’t like programming or innately have less
        aptitude.
    
    10. Getting a (better) job is the main reason someone should learn
        how to program.

5.  In what contexts will this material be used?
    
    1.  Primary: an intensive weekend workshop for people in tech who
        want to volunteer with grassroots get-into-coding initiatives.
    
    2.  Secondary: self-study or guided study by such people.
    
    3.  Secondary: a one-semester undergraduate course for computer
        science majors interested in education.

## Intended Audience

*These learner personas clarify what readers are interested in and what
can be assumed about their prior knowledge.*

  - Emily  
    trained as a librarian, and now works as a web designer and project
    manager in a small consulting company. In her spare time, she helps
    run web design classes for women entering tech as a second career.
    She is now recruiting colleagues to run more classes in her area
    using the lessons that she has created, and wants to know how to
    grow a volunteer teaching organization.

  - Moshe  
    is a professional programmer with two teenage children whose school
    doesn’t offer programming classes. He has volunteered to run a
    monthly after-school programming club, and while he frequently gives
    presentations to colleagues, he has no experience designing lessons.
    He wants to learn how to build effective lessons in collaboration
    with others, and is interested in turning his lessons into a
    self-paced online course.

  - Samira  
    is an undergraduate in robotics who is thinking about becoming a
    full-time teacher after she graduates. She wants to help teach
    weekend workshops for undergraduate women, but has never taught an
    entire class before, and feels uncomfortable teaching things that
    she’s not an expert in. She wants to learn more about education in
    general in order to decide if it’s for her.

  - Gene  
    is a professor of computer science whose research area is operating
    systems. They have been teaching undergraduate classes for six
    years, and increasingly believe that there has to be a better way.
    The only training available through their university’s teaching and
    learning center relates to posting assignments and grades in the
    learning management system, so they want to find out what else they
    ought to be asking for.

Common elements:

  - A variety of technical backgrounds and skills.

  - May or may not have some teaching experience.

  - No formal training in teaching, lesson design, or community
    organization.

  - More likely to teach in free-range settings often than in
    institutional classrooms with required homework, final exams, and
    externally-mandated curriculum.

  - Focused on teenagers and adults rather children.

  - Limited time and resources (either because they are volunteers, or
    because their institution considers teaching a secondary
    responsibility).

Learning contexts:

  - Emily  
    will take part in a weekly online reading group with her volunteers.

  - Moshe  
    will cover part of this book in a two-day weekend workshop and study
    the rest on his own.

  - Samira  
    will use this book in a one-semester undergraduate course with
    assignments, a project, and a final exam.

  - Gene  
    will read the book on their own in their office or while commuting,
    wishing all the while that universities did more to support
    high-quality teaching.

## Exercises

*These formative exercises summarize what learners will be able to do
with their new knowledge. The finished book will include others as
well.*

1.  Create multiple choice questions whose incorrect answers have
    diagnostic power.

2.  Give feedback on a recorded teaching episode and compare points with
    expert feedback.

3.  Create a Parsons Problem.

4.  Create a short debugging exercise.

5.  Create a short execution tracing exercise.

6.  Explain their personal motivation for teaching.

7.  Explain their community of practice’s aims and conventions.

8.  Explain the difference between an oversight board and a governance
    board.

9.  Design an hour-long lesson using backward design.

10. Describe the pros and cons of standardized testing.

11. Create learner personas for their intended students.

12. Write and critique learning objectives for an hour-long lesson.

13. Write and critique a short value proposition for a class they intend
    to offer.

14. Teach a short lesson using live coding and critique a recording of
    it.

15. Create a short video lesson and critique it.

16. Construct a short series of faded examples that illustrate a
    problem-solving pattern in programming.

17. Describe ways in which they differ from their intended learners.

18. Create and critique an elevator pitch for a course they intend to
    teach.

19. Write a “cold call” email to solicit support for what they intend to
    teach.

20. Create a concept map for a topic they intend to teach.

21. Explain six strategies students can use to learn more effectively.

22. Analyze and critique the accessibility of a short online lesson.

23. Analyze and critique the inclusivity of a short lesson.

24. Create and critique a non-programming exercise to use in a
    programming class.

25. Describe the relative merits of block-based and text-based
    environments for introductory programming classes for adults.

26. Create a one-to-one matching exercise for use in a class they intend
    to teach.

27. Create a diagram labelling exercise for use in a class they intend
    to teach.

28. Write and submit an improvement or extension to an existing lesson
    and review a peer’s submission.

29. Describe the pros and cons of collaborative note-taking.

30. Describe the pros and cons of gamification in online learning.

31. Create and critique a short questionnaire for assessing learners’
    prior knowledge.

32. Conduct a demonstration lesson using peer instruction.

33. Describe ways in which computing is unwelcoming to or unaccepting of
    people from diverse backgrounds.

34. Demonstrate several ways to ensure that an instructor’s attention is
    fairly distributed through a class.

35. Describe the pros and cons of in-person, automated, and hybrid
    teaching strategies.

36. Write and critique automated tests for a short programming exercise.

## Outline

*Each major section can be covered in detail in 2–3 weeks in a
conventional classroom format, or in less detail in one full day in an
intensive workshop format.*

1.  Introduction

2.  Learning
    
    1.  Building Mental Models
    
    2.  Expertise and Memory
    
    3.  Cognitive Load
    
    4.  Effective Learning

3.  Designing
    
    1.  A Lesson Design Process
    
    2.  Pedagogical Content Knowledge

4.  Delivering
    
    1.  Teaching as a Performance Art
    
    2.  Live Coding
    
    3.  Motivation and Demotivation
    
    4.  Automation
    
    5.  Hybrid Models

5.  Organizing
    
    1.  Awareness
    
    2.  Operations
    
    3.  Building Community

## Course Overview

### Brief Description

Teaching isn’t magic: good teachers are simply people who have learned
how to design lessons to achieve concrete goals, how to get and use
feedback from learners, and how to work well with other teachers. This
book will show you how to do these things and more, and will introduce
you to some of the research that explains why some things work and some
things don’t. It is primarily intended for people in tech with no formal
training in teaching who want to help adults learn how to create web
sites, write programs, and analyze data, but the ideas apply equally
well to other groups in other settings.

### Learning Objectives

Learners will be able to<span>…</span>

1.  Explain the cognitive changes that occur as people go from novice to
    competent to expert and how best to teach each group.

2.  Explain how to design, construct, and maintain lessons in a
    systematic, collaborative way.

3.  Design exercises to help correct key misconceptions that learners
    have about computing.

4.  Summarize key elements of pedagogical content knowledge related to
    computing and other technical skills.

5.  Compare and contrast teaching with other performance arts and
    participate in structured critiques of live teaching.

6.  Compare and contrast interactive teaching, automated teaching, and
    hybrid models.

7.  Describe factors that motivate or demotivate adult learners and how
    to take those into account when teaching.

8.  Describe ways in which members of different groups are made to feel
    unwelcome or excluded in computing and what can be done to make
    computing more inclusive.

9.  Explain the purpose and value of their teaching and of their
    community of practice.

10. Be a productive member of a community of teaching practice.

### Prerequisites

Some exercises will assume a small amount of programming knowledge:
readers should know how to loop over the elements of a list, how to take
action using an if-else statement, and how to write and call a simple
function.
